<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://use.fontawesome.com/releases/v5.7.2/css/all.css">

## Introduction

<!-- Non-exhaustive tool list at https://pangenome.github.io/ -->

The current reference genome is the backbone of diverse and rich annotations. 
It is used as a reference to map sequencing reads.
The coordinate system it provides is used by large annotation databases of functional elements, known variant information, and genomic elements. 
The organization and visualization of these annotations has been central to understanding and sharing results from genomic studies.
In practice, annotations about a genome are typically saved separately from the genome itself, in formatted text files that can be compressed and indexed for fast query (e.g. VCF, BED, GFF).
Under the hood, the HTSlib library supports the indexing of the most used file formats[@htslib].
These annotation files are easy to write and to load in software like IGV[@igv] or websites like the UCSC Genome Browser[@doi:10.1093/nar/gkac1072].

With improved genome sequencing technologies, more high-quality genomes can be produced and combined into pangenomes.
A pangenome represents multiple genomes, often as a graph describing adjacencies (edges) between the sequences (nodes) in the genomes.
Tools to work with such pangenomes are still in their infancy, although there are now several options that show improved performance over traditional approaches.
In particular, sequencing data analysis benefits from using pangenomes as a reference for read mapping[@vg;@giraffe], variant calling[@vgsv], peak calling[@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006731;@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02038-8], or transcript expression quantification[@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01731-9].
Hence, we are now manipulating genomic objects, like sequencing reads, epigenetic regions, or genomic variants, in the pangenome graph space.
Currently, those results are typically flattened or "surjected" onto the linear reference genome.
As with the linear genome reference, organizing and visualizing genomic annotation in the pangenome will be essential.
User-friendly querying and visualization options are required for the adoption of the pangenomic paradigm.

Several interactive visualization tools for pangenomes exist, but mostly focus on representing the graph topology, with tool-specific approaches to the integration of additional information layers. We provide a short review of several of them here:

* **Bandage-NG[@{https://github.com/asl/BandageNG}]**, a derivative of Bandage[@bandage], can interactively visualize assembly graphs, and scales to pangenomes up to hundreds of thousands of nodes on modern computers.
* **GfaViz** is another interactive sequence graph visualization tool that supports version 2 of the Graphical Fragment Assembly (GFA) format and its new features[@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty1046].
In particular, it can represent the different paths annotated in the GFA file.
GfaViz cannot load additional annotation files: the annotations, written for example as GFA *paths*, must be included in the main pangenome file to be accessible during exploration. 
* **The Sequence Tube Map** visualizes the pangenome and sequencing reads aligned to it, allowing the user to query specific regions[@tubemap].
Prior to the present work, the application supported only the binary GAM format[@vg] for displaying additional information on the graph.
It has some support for BED files, but only for inputting regions to display: BED-format annotations cannot be displayed.
* **MoMI-G**, or Modular Multi-scale Integrated Genome Graph Browser, focuses on visualizing structural variants[@doi:10.1186/s12859-019-3145-2].
Variants are interactively selected and represented with a pangenome view as a custom Sequence Tube Map representation. 
Supporting reads, and genome annotations from files in BED/GFF/WIG format, can also be included in that representation. 
Only the reference genome path can be annotated.
* **Panache** is another pangenomic tool specializing in gene-centric visualization of a linearized view of the pangenome, where blocks of homologous sequences are represented side by side[@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btab688].
The blocks are interactively explored in a web-based application to analyze their gene content and their absence/presence in the different genomes.
Panache is notably used in the Banana Genome Hub[@doi:10.1093/database/bat035].
<!-- [`gfaestus`](https://github.com/chfi/gfaestus)???. -->

In summary, while some visualization tools exist, there is no consensus on the best way to provide additional annotation layers to their graph representations.

A couple of other options exist to display static representations of a pangenome graph (or subgraph).
The `vg` toolkit can output a pangenome and alignments in the DOT format. 
Paths can be displayed too, but the image can become hard to read when many paths are included or in large graphs.
The `odgi` toolkit offers visualizations that scale better to larger graphs and more annotations[@odgi]. 
The pangenome is linearized using a 1D layout[@layout], and annotations are displayed on top of the graph as an array/heatmap.
Notably, `odgi` implements two options to add annotations from external BED files: one to convert annotations to a CSV file to help color nodes in Bandage, and another that injects BED records into the graph as new embedded paths that can appear in `odgi`'s own visualizations.
One limitation to this approach is that, in the pangenome data model used by `odgi`, `vg`, and the GFA format, embedded paths are forced to cover entire nodes.
There is no way to provide an *offset* or *length* value to specify the base at which a path must start or end.

There is a dire need for a format supporting annotations in the pangenome that is easy to create, index, and query.
Noting the success of the BED, GFF, or VCF formats, we see a critical need to exchange (pan)genomic information and allow tools to access additional information in the pangenomic space.
The Graph Alignment Format (GAF) text format, which was proposed to represent alignments,could also be used to describe annotations in a pangenome graph.
However, the lack of techniques to compress, index, and query it limits its adoption for larger-scale annotation sets.
Here, we present new features of the `vg` and HTSlib ecosystem that provide efficient indexing and querying for pangenomic annotations represented as paths in the GAF format.
We illustrate its values in several applications: projecting gene and repeat annotations into the pangenome and visualizing them, summarizing open chromatin from epigenomics sequencing datasets, and positioning known variants in the pangenome.
